Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I have a return guest for you, Doctor
Austin Fuentes, professor of anthropology at Princeton University. And
today we're talking about his new book, Sex is
a Spectrum, The Biological Limits of the Binary. So,
Doctor Fuentes, welcome back to the show. It's always
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Ricardo, it's, it's my pleasure to be here again.
It's a fantastic show.
Thank you. So, before we get into this discussion
surrounding the supposed sex binary and how sex biology
varies across species, let me start by asking you
because this is also something that you talk about
at the beginning of your book. Uh, WHY has
sex evolved? I mean, couldn't we all, and by
we all, I mean, all organisms on Earth just
reproduce asexually.
Yeah, I, there's, uh, a number of books. There's
some really good books on sexual evolution of sex
in the 1950s and 1960s that all start with
the sort of frame that sex makes no sense
from an evolutionary perspective. It, it, it, you know,
uh, because of asexual reproduction, right? And the first
billion years or so of life was asexual reproduction.
Um, SO when we talk about sexual reproduction, right,
we're, uh, talking about a particular reproductive. AND evolutionary
process. Um, SO before I go into that, can
I point out that the, the way people say
sex or use sex is like 5 different kinds
of things. Um, SO I want to identify really
quickly. So when people talk about sex, we talk
about sex as a biological and evolutionary process, which
is what we're about to talk about right now.
People also talk about sex exclusively as a reproductive
process, right? That involves both behavior and biology. People
also talk, use the word. Sex to talk about
social processes that involve, you know, sexual behavior, that
involve behavioral biology. People also use sex to talk
about sex biology, right? The reproductive biology and all
the related biology. And finally, people use sex as
a term to talk about the way we can
use sex-related biology as a way to categorize bodies,
behaviors, and variation in a species. And so, sex
is really complicated when we're not clear about what
we're talking about.
Right. OK, but, but then in regards to my
question, why has it evolved? I mean, why do
we have sex.
Sex is a biological process, there's a number of
hypotheses, but the most solid one is that in
after about a billion years of life on this
planet of organisms reproducing asexually, which is just copying
their sort of uh genetic or or their internal
components and dividing into two versions of themselves and
therefore creating two sort of asexual reproduction. Um, THAT
limits variation, right, to just mutation. You, you don't
get other forms of variation introduced into the sort
of biological potential. With sex, the argument is, if
you have two slightly different versions of the same
species, same kind of organism. And they're able to
combine their genetic material to the, and, and other
materials to then produce a new organism, and offspring,
that's some version of a combination of those two
parental, uh, uh, organisms, the chance for variation beyond
just variation introduced by mutation. Gives the possibility that
the subsequent organism, the offspring, is gonna have a
little bit more variation and thus potential flexibility to
deal with environmental challenges. So, if we imagine, you
know, plot, you know, a bunch of single-celled organisms
in the primordial muck, you know, uh, Billions of
years ago, um, if there were temperature gradients or
salinity gradients or other kinds of gradients that emerged
out of, you know, that weren't there before, some
variation in the potential to respond to changing environmental
context would be beneficial. And on average, if sex
produces this variation, and this variation gives you uh
a little bit of advantage, over time, if you
get a little bit of advantage, it's gonna show
up more and more frequently, right? That's, that's the
basic argument. Um, AND so basically, sex as a
biological process evolved to increase variation in the world,
right? In increased variation and thus adaptive, or at
least acclimatization for possibilities for organisms.
And when we talk about sex and sex biology
and particularly from uh the uh genetics perspective, many
times people use words like anisogamy. So what is
anisogamy and how did the transition from isogamy to
anisogamy occur and why is that important?
Yeah, it's very funny, people pronounce these in all
this right. So isogamy and isogamy. Isogamy is two
gametes, that is the production of uh these. Cells,
sex cells that get together to produce an offspring
from two parents. An isogamy is gametes of the
same size, anisogamy is gametes of different size. And
once sort of sex has been around as an
evolutionary biological process for a while, it looks like
we start to see the development of different sized
gametes, that is, organisms. Of what we call mating
types within a species or within a, uh, uh,
a population, begin to produce slightly different or even
very, very different kinds of gametes that come together,
bringing both the genetic material and other materials together.
So anisogamy has become for a variety of reasons,
uh, which we don't fully understand. Uh, FOR a
variety of reasons, has become one of the dominant
forms of, uh, sexual reproduction. Isogamy still exists, um,
but, but anisogamy for most of the things we're
interested in, in, in a, a discussion that's eventually
about humans and animals and a variety of other
things, and, and plants too. Anisogamy, uh, is the
typical pattern. That is one gamete that is very
different from the other gametes. So two kinds of
gamete is what anisogamy means. And that's, that's the
typical pattern we see in, in animals now.
Mhm. So in biology, when people talk about males
and females, what does that mean? What is a
male and what is a female?
So, this is also one of those things where
we've got all of these different definitions running around.
But let's keep it very, very simple. And let's
talk about, there's two ways in which we talk
about in biology about males and females. One is
sort of a heuristic, like, OK, here's the general
40,000 ft. PATTERN, right? That we're just going to
use as a categorization. And then there's the specifics
when we talk about lineages or dynamics or when
we're actually talking about evolutionary processes and behavior. So
that 40,000 ft, the general pattern, at least for
the last, you know, two centuries, maybe century and
a half. Probably a century and a half, uh,
by the late 1800s, has been to say, uh,
the, uh, in a sexual reproducing species, the, uh,
suite of, of biology, right? The physiology that produces
a large gamete is a female and the physiology
that produces a small gamete. A male. That's the
sort of 40,000 ft level giant characterization. The problem
is that individual sort of lineages, when we're looking
at particular species or lineages genera or lineages of
species, we get a lot of variation. We still
see this pattern with small and large gamete, but
what actually A large gamete or a small gamete
tells you about the body size, the overall physiology,
the ecology, the behavior, actually doesn't work that well
in a general sense. So, what we have to
do then is talk about males and females as
these categories. And then also, if we're asking about
a particular lineage, we have to talk about specifics.
Uh, AND, and there we can get into other
definitions of male and female. So, for example, in
humans, I'm rambling here, but this is sort of
a long question, so I want to be clear.
In humans, Uh, and mammals, I would argue. But
in humans, uh, for example, now frequently, uh, when
we talk about sex, we're really talking about what's
called 3G sex. That is typical clusters of biology,
right? Of, of physiology that include, uh, genetic pattern,
a gonadal pattern, and a genital pattern, right? And
so, sort of 3G female in humans is someone
who is XX, uh, has, uh, ovaries and has,
uh, uh, labia, clitoris, uh, vagina. Uh, WHEREAS a
3G male is someone who's XY, has testes, and
has a penis and scrotum, right? So those are
typical clusters of physiology. And the reason I like
to use 3G and I use it in the
book, is because these are identifiable, measurable patterns that
we can Talk about that vary in particular and
interesting ways and clustering ways. And that gives us
something to actually talk about biologically because just saying
like, OK, uh, you know, uh, gamey, like, uh,
an egg is a female and a sperm is
a male, doesn't really tell you much in an
actual biological sense.
Well, OK, but, uh, I, I mean, on what
basis do biologists distinguish between males and females? Is
it on the basis of sex chromosomes of go
nets, of gametes, of primary and secondary sexual characteristics?
Uh, I mean, what is it exactly? Because I
hear many times people saying that the, I mean,
the basic difference between the male. And the female
has to do with the, just the size of
the gametes that each of the sexes produces. But
is that really enough, or?
Um, I would argue that's enough for some basic
theoretical discussions, but that's not nearly enough for any
actual practical work, right, in biology. So, I'm much
more interested. So, for example, you identified a whole
bunch of things that are associated with sex, uh,
biology, right? So it could Be, uh, reproductive physiology,
could be endocrine pattern, typical endocrine patterns, could be
behavior, right? All of those things, uh, can be
identified and cluster in, in, in ways that we
can use to categorize males and females. So, I
mean, here's the challenge, right? It's what question are
we asking? So it's fine to say males produce
small gametes, females produce large gametes. But what does
that tell us, right? So, let's take a bunch
of large gamete producing. Uh, MAMMALS, like a human,
a kangaroo, a cotton top tamarind, uh, a duck-billed
platypus, uh, and, um, a hyena. Like, those are
all five females, right? They produce large gametes. But
let me tell you, their physiology, their ecological niche,
their evolutionary histories, their morphology and their behavior are
radically different from one another. So, we have to
really, so what questions are we asking, I guess
is is where I'm going.
Mhm. But if, uh, males are the ones who
produce the small gametes and females are the ones
who produce the large gametes, uh, isn't it much
cheaper for males to produce their gametes than females?
And doesn't that translate generally speaking into different patterns
of sexual behavior between them?
You would think so, because that's what we're taught
basically, right? So that, uh, notion of sort of
cheap sperm and costly eggs derives initially from, well,
Darwin's perceptions, right? Darwin sort of thought this was
the pattern, but he didn't know about gametes. He,
he hypothesized, right? Pangaans and things like that, but
he, he wasn't there totally, uh, in the sense
of the genetics. Um, BUT really, this derives from
work in the 20s and 30s by Angus Bateman,
uh, a fruit fly biologist. And, uh, Bateman did
a number of classic experiments. He published arguing that,
in fact, that, uh, the sexes are, are quite
different, um, and that the investment results in indiscriminatory,
and here is a quote from him, an indiscriminatory
eagerness in the males and a discriminatory passivity in
the females. That is, um, males, because sperm is
cheap, want to just inseminate as many, uh, female
flies as possible, and females, because the eggs are
so expensive, have to be choosy about which males
they allow to inseminate them. However, if you look
over the last 30 years, a number of scholars
have tried to replicate his work and examined his
work, uh, Patricia Gawadi in her lab, uh, Zulmeang
Martinnis in her lab, and others. And they've shown
that his actual results don't clearly support or as
clearly support that argument. So, one of the problems
is this theory has become prominent in the biological
literature, yet that the actual studies it was based
on don't quite hold out. That said, it, you
know, a single to produce a single ova, particularly
in some species, many species, it varies with a
couple others, but produce a single ova versus the
cost of a single sperm, those are dramatically different.
But in most organisms, let's take most mammals, for
example, the comparison isn't one over to one sperm.
It's one over to millions and millions of sperm,
right? So in humans, the comparison for a fertilized,
or potential fusion, right, uh, is 1 over in
about 14 million or 10 to 14 million sperm.
So this gets a little complicated when we talk
about costs. And then, Uh, we also have to
note that for many organisms, costs don't, aren't exclusive
to the production of gametes. There's in fact a
wide variety of other kinds of costs to successfully
produce. So, it's really interesting how this idea about
anisogamy driving everything has become sort of central, even
though the data don't always support that.
Right. Well, well, you know, I, I read your
book and I also read uh the new book
by Doctor Nathan Lentz, The Sexual Revolution Revolution actually,
and Lucy Cook's bitch, and, uh, I, I mean,
now, uh, there are, I know that there are
general patterns for males and females across species, but
I also tend to have more of a Let's
say framework where I say that maybe it's better
to go at it on a case by case
basis, on a species by species basis because there's
lots of variation and you talk also a lot
about that in your own book. But, uh, I
mean, but since we have uh two gamut producing
physiologies across species and perhaps here we can start
to get into a discussion surrounding Whether sex is
binary or not or if it occurs on the
spectrum or not. Uh, I mean, uh, don't those
who respond to male and female, and I mean,
if there's not a third gamut producing physiology, uh,
isn't that an argument against sex occurring on the
spectrum or
not? No, I don't think so at all. So
I I mean, here's that, that maybe people don't
always understand what a binary and a spectrum are,
right? So a binary is, uh, two different kinds
of thing within a category. So, what, let's say
the classic binary, numeric binary, 1 or 0, right?
1 or 0. A 1 and a 0 are
both numbers, right? Uh, BUT they're, they're radically different.
They do not share anything aside from their categorical
representation in a number, right? They mean different. That's
a binary. Um, A spectrum, right, is a distribution
of patterns with what you can call radically different
frequencies or very different or slightly different frequencies that
cluster, right? So, for example, when we talk about,
let's just talk about, uh, you know, uh, mammals
or humans, right? Male and female humans, um, which
are not the same thing at all, but they're
not made of different stuff. Right? Everything We have
is, in fact, constituted of the same things. We're
clusters of variation, and we'll talk more about this,
and like, how does that variation pattern out. And
so, rather than thinking of males and females as
a 10, I think thinking of them as different
frequencies or variations or typical clusters of this organic
material, right? Uh, GIVES us a better understanding of
development of evolutionary possibilities and of reproductive dynamics.
Mhm. Um, BUT aren't there at least some general
patterns? Of course, this is a different kind of
question, but some general patterns when it comes to
sexual and reproductive behavior and also parental behavior for
males and females across species.
Well, across all species? No, right? I mean, if
you're talking about insects and birds and reptiles and
humans, there's huge variation in patterns of what's going
on. I mean, if you want to just Constrain
that to mammals, which is sort of the most
relevant thing. Although other patterns are also really interesting,
which I'd love to talk about. But if we
just think about mammals, there's particularly because of this
very, very, sort of, let's say, constrained and very
successful, um, reproductive physiology of mammals, the reproductive sort
of biological dynamics. Um, THERE'S a clear constraint, right,
uh, around the gestation and lactation, right? So only
certain bodies, right? And generally, Bodies that are large
gamete producers can develop the physiology necessary for gestation
and lactation. And so that typical constraint is there.
But what's really fascinating is if you look across
all mammals, there are, of course, typical patterns where
let's say, those, uh, who gestate and lactate, right?
We tend to call females, um, are more often
involved in higher densities of care and always involved
in lactation. I mean, if they, if they're lactating.
Um, BUT there isn't a 1 to 1 prediction
that is We don't see large gamete means this
kind of care and small gamete means this kind
of care, because we actually see a variation. Mammals,
again, have a little bit less variation than, say,
something like birds, where there's almost no variation because
both gamey types produce care. Um, WHEN you get
to fish, it becomes very variable from no care
at all to, uh, care by either small or
large gamete producers. And then insects is a whole
other thing, especially with cooperative care, you know, the
sort of multi-individual care and only a few individuals
reproducing. So, I, I keep rambling at these long
answers, but what it's so exciting though when you
dive down into this, cause of course there are
typical patterns in lineages or in clusters of organisms.
But to say like there's one way to do
sex across the animal kingdom is simply wrong.
Uh, AND how do we deal in terms of,
let's say, sex, biology, distribution? How do we deal
with species who are hermaphrodites and, uh, for, for
example, fish species whose uh individuals change sex in
particular contexts.
Yeah, so I mean, that's what's really interesting, right?
And those are Individuals aren't hermaphrodites usually very few
fish are hermaphrodites. But what's really interesting is that
when we look across the animal kingdom in particular,
let, let's not even talk about plants because that's
amazing but so complicated, it'll just make your head
explode. But with animals, when it comes to sex,
um, what's really fascinating is that, yes, there's some
typical patterns associated with reproductive biology, right, some constraints.
Uh, BUT Those constraints don't map the same across
different lineages. So, for example, as you just noted,
there are many fish species and whole clusters of
of of of lineages where the same body, one
individual with one set of DNA undergoes sort of
physiological. Changes such that that individual has either first
male or female reproductive small gamete or a large
gamete producing, uh, physiology, then at some point in
life switches to the other kind of gamete producing
physiology. And in some cases, even switches back or
might switch multiple times during the lifetime. So then,
I would argue, if we're thinking in a binary
frame, what do we call that? That individual doesn't
become a different thing, right? When it switches physiology,
but it shows the kind of flexibility, and this
is what I mean by spectrum. I don't mean
that everything is just all mixed together. I'm saying
they're clear typical clusters and patterns, but they're deriving
from the same biological materials. And so we need
to think about biology. And even in, in, in
mammals, right, uh, where we think, you know, it's
a pretty constrained physiological. PROCESS. Uh, WE see wide
ranges in, in patterns of care in both males
and females, even though they're typical patterns. So, um,
I, I think this argument about sex being seen
as a spectrum as opposed to binary, doesn't in
any way negate typical patterns and these sort of
wide-reaching sort of ways in which we can model
stuff. But it reminds us we'd better look at
the lineage of the species before we assert, like,
this is how this organism works.
Mhm. But in regards to the hermaphrodite species, I
mean, they, they do not respond to a third
sex, or do they?
I mean, no, uh, I, I, so here's the
problem. How do we want to call this? And
here's the problem with binary, we're like, well, it's
either 2 or it's 3, or it's 5, or
it's 4. I don't actually worry about that. I'm
much more worried about what is the patterns of
variation in, let's say, reproductive physiology, right? So hermaphrodite,
like, let's take earthworms, right? Um, EARTHWORMS are fascinating
because they're all hermaphroditic in the sense that they're
intersect. Truly that they have both sexual, um, components,
right? Full reproductive systems. Um, SO what do we
call those? MALFEM or female? It's just part of
that variation. And then there are other things like
C. ELEGANS, right? The most famous of all worms
where all these biologists work on them. They have
sort of two sort of sexual phenotypes, but it's
not male and female, right? One is sort of
intersex. OR hermaphrodite, and the other is, uh, male,
no. Yeah, male. So there's no regular like just
females. And so I think the bottom line then
is, we got to step back from thinking there's
just two fixed ways to do sex in the
animal kingdom, and to ask questions about each lineage
of the dynamics, what are the adaptive histories, what's
going on? How do we understand that. Uh, WE
really have to do the biology rather than just
sort of philosophize about what these things mean.
Mhm. When it comes to mammals specifically in the
book, you talk about some interesting examples like monogamous
primates, monogamous, quote unquote, and uh naked mole rats.
So could you, could you tell us about them?
What's the deal with them exactly? So
this is one of these just amazing things, right?
You would expect in mammals to be of all
the animal kingdom. This should be the most consistent.
And because of this reproductive structure of gestational lactation
of particular modes, particularly of placental mammals, you would
think that that's, there's real typical and everyone would
be the same. But then, you know, take something
like naked mole rats, which have, at a in
a superficial look, you know, there is one female
usually who's quite large, who does the reproducing. There's
a bunch of other females who are physiologically capable.
Physiologically and endocrinologically capable of cycling and reproducing, but
who don't. And there's not some sort of behavioral
or pheromonal control of these females, but they're sort
of like workers, like worker bees. And then you
have the males that do mate with the, uh,
one or, or two, reproducing females. And so naked
mole rats, and they're very weird to begin with.
They have really weird thermoregulation issues. They live underground,
they look funny. Uh. But, uh, they're an extreme
version. They have, they're a mammal that's sort of
moved to something that's not homologous, but analogous to
an insect reproductive system. Um, WHEREAS what we call
the monogamous primates is the, the pair living primates,
which is I studied for part of my dissertation
and, and, and years ago, we think that monogamy
is weird in, if we believe anisogamy Bateman's arguments,
right? So monogamy shouldn't happen because why would a
male stay with one female? That's weird. So there
must be some issues. So the male, in this
case, must be needed to raise the young. So
I, I went out to do my dissertation field
with like, oh, I'm going to study monogamous primate.
Clearly, anisogamy happens, it's cheap for males, expensive for
females. Why would that male stay? He must be
doing all the caretaking of the young. OK, so
the males of the species, I was looking at
bursitiss Potenziani do no caretaking of the young at
all. In fact, they don't even hang out much
with the female. They don't seem to interact much
at all. So what it turns out is that
there's a lot of pair living primates, but they
do a bunch of different kinds of things. So,
again, they don't fit this sort of expectation. As
to an explanation of social system based on what
we assume the costs are of reproduction. And so
what both of these cases show us is that
yes, there's some mammalian constraints on reproduction, but that
there's a really wide range of the way in
which mammals engage and deal with those constraints.
What do you mean when you say, and now
I'm going to ask you specifically about humans, when
you say that humans are biocultural.
I mean, I think this is one of the
most challenging things, right, as a, as a sort
of biological anthropologist, human biologist, someone who studies humans
and and and the human past and human relatives
that humans are primates. Um, I, I think it's
really, really important. To recognize that the cultural niche,
right? That is thoughts, perceptions, linguistically mediated contexts, sort
of the way in which historical, written, spoken, social
narratives, mores and expectations in societies are not just
sort of a separate veneer on the biology. They're
actually mutually interfacing with our bodies, right? What we
eat, right, shapes our nutrition, shapes our microbiome, which
in fact is a critical part of human biological
functioning. And so, The bottom line is to say
that anyone who studies humans for any amount of
time recognizes that we can't just talk about bodies,
right, or genetics or biology and environment. We have
to think about the way in which this particular
niche that humans exist in, this cultural niche, is
integrated into the body and how the body pushes
on that niche. So, that's what I mean by
biocultural. And let me just say, this is a
whole other conversation, but there's a lot of good
literature out there that says biocultural might be actually
much more common in other organisms, particularly primates, cetaceans,
and some other things as well.
Is this the point where we get the difference
between sex and gender?
Uh, SO this is, uh, you know, this is,
it's so intellectually, it's exciting, right, to talk about
these things because it's, it's very important, but it's
so difficult, because on the one hand, I'm gonna
say, yes, we need to talk about biology and
culture in these different ways so we can understand
them. But in the same sentence, I'm gonna say,
but you can't pull them apart. So I'm gonna
tell you that sex and gender, let's talk about
them separately, but in reality, they never exist without
one another. We have gender sex. So, Gender, in,
in the general sense is that a social, cultural,
historical expectations and practices of a society, right? It's
the way in which society expects certain kinds of
bodies, right, uh, to behave and to act. Now,
what's really interesting about gender cross culturally, is that
there's not always two genders. Um, SOMETIMES there's more.
And also, in many cases, gender is not measured
in sort of categorical, but Rather a, um, uh,
emphasis on particular patterns, right? So, masculinity and femininity
is a better way to think about gender than
male and female. Um, SO these clusters. And then
again, sometimes we have more than two genders in,
in, in many societies. Sex, on the other hand,
here, I'm talking about 3G sex, right? So I'm
sorry about these typical patterns of, of genetic gonads
and genitals that help us understand sort of biological
systems in, in humans. Now, let me point out
that using 3G sex, Excludes a certain percentage of
humans, cause there are a cluster of humans that
don't fall into those typical clusters. And the same
thing with gender, then, we can say someone's masculine
or feminine, but then we get these blends, right?
No one is ever just all the way on
one side or the other. And so, what it
comes down to it is we can identify for
specific research, specific biological, specific sex targets, or specific
gender targets. But we always have to step back
and, and ask, what are the relations between these
things? Because a human is born into a cultural
world with a biological body, and those two things
are always interconnected.
So not everyone falls into one of the two
cluster, the 2 3G sex clusters in humans, but
I mean, isn't it that there's a very, very
high correlation in humans, at least between genes, gonads
and genitals.
Yeah, there is a pretty high correlation. So here's
what's interesting. There's a very, very rare total departure
from that, that cluster. Right? But there's huge actual
variation, let's, for example, say in genitals. The range
of genital development of, of functional, phenotypic variation in
genitals is actually fairly large. And so, so where
do we sort of do that dividing line? And
what's really interesting is we really need to look
at adult genitals to sort of understand function and
things like that, because we know that, um, during
development, during Childhood, there's a lot of plasticity in
genital development, particularly prior to sort of the pubertal
endocrine shifts where we get full development of some
of the genital stuff. So, yeah, most people fall
into a general 3G categories. Um, SOME people don't,
but what's really interesting, a lot of people who
probably sense that they're one particular 3G category, there
could be variation in, in any of those 3,
3Gs that we wouldn't even notice or see.
OK, but those people who fall outside of the
two main 3G sex categories, are you referring to
intersex? Yeah,
yeah. So that would be intersex people, but again,
how we define that depends on different categories, right?
So, for example, uh, the World Athletics, uh, uh,
group, right, the track and field uh international organization
has a very specific definition of a certain circulating
levels of testosterone that defines you as female, right?
As a woman in their case. Um, BUT what's
really interesting is that there's a very large percentage
of females who have PCO polycystic ovarian syndrome, or
some other syndromes, whose, uh, resting testosterone, circulating testosterone
is much higher than that. Um, BUT they are
full of 3G. And so, really, this becomes like
a dependent on, we have all these different ways
in cultures of classifying. Uh, uh, SEX, that sometimes
it doesn't fit. So how, how we're defining intersex
depends if we're talking just about biological dynamics, or
if we're talking about the way in which cultures
are defining. Males and females or, or men and
women, and I'm sure we'll get into the conversation
about how those things differ later too.
Yes, sure. But when it comes, for example, to
medicine or at least Western medicine, people tend to
refer to intersex people as them having some sort
of disorder of sexual development and so that would
indicate that they are Let's say exceptions to the
rule. I mean, how do you deal with that?
So let's, let's think about that when we think
about the distribution of variation in biological traits, right?
So, for example, there are very, very few humans
who reach, you know, 2.5 m in height. Right?
That's, that's an extreme distribution of that trade. However,
reaching 2.5 m in height, which is, well, that's
actually really tall, let's say 2 m, 10 centimeters
or something, you know, that, that, that's still very
high, very tall. Um, THAT'S an extreme version of
that, but that may not have any impact on
reproductive function or, or, or some other biological functions,
uh, affecting longevity, right? And I'm not saying that
intersects. Conditions or intersex classification is always the same
thing as a distribution. But what we're talking about
in some intersex contexts is just an extreme part
of the distribution, right? That doesn't have necessarily negative
context in the sense of biological or social functioning.
And so then we have to ask, we're calling
this a disorder because it's outside of the typical
cluster, but is that being outside A disorder or
part of the range of variation. I think we
have to be very careful here. For example, uh,
recent work on neurodivergence has reclassified the way in
which we think about. So what is typical and
atypical, and how do we think about that in
the sense of neurobiological functioning? I mean, a recent
work on what's used to be or generally called
aut autistic spectrum also shows that there's actually a,
a range of distribution of neurobiological and cognitive function
in humans that is in the range. Typical, but
has typical clusters, and people fall outside that typical
cluster. And so I think the challenge here is
to be very specific about what we're saying. So
for example, it's common to say, you know, an
extra X or an extra Y chromosome is a
particular kind of disorder. Well, in some cases, um,
there's really little physiological impact. So you could call
it a disorder, but if it isn't impacting sort
of the capacity for this individual to function in
society or to reproduce. Then you have to ask,
well, what, what are we meaning by disorder? So
I, I think much, much better attention to what
we mean by the distribution of variation uh needs
to be clarified before we say disorders.
Right. But I mean, the main reason why I
asked you that, or perhaps one of the main
reasons is that someone might pick on that to
say, OK, but then, I mean, sex in humans
would still be binary in the sense that we
have females and males, and then there's a tiny
minority of people who have these disorders of sexual
development. And they are exceptions in terms of how
they The sexual characteristics develop and in terms of
not perhaps having a correspondence between genes, gonads, and
genitals. Uh, BUT, I mean, we could still classify
them as primarily male or female with just some,
uh, variations in terms of their sex biology. I
don't know you, what you,
no, no, no, that's a very common argument. And
I would say there's two ones. Let's talk about
the general bi. Biological sort of argument there. And
then let's talk about the medical argument. The general
biological argument, I, I, my response is, you're trying
that argument is trying really, really hard to force
variation into conceptual categories, as opposed to describe the
variation, the biological variation that's there. Um, IF we
don't have two separate kinds, and there's variation linking
those kinds, and the variation in those kinds is
all from the same materials, I would argue that's
not a binary. That, that's, that's a kind of
spectrum. That doesn't mean in any way. SHAPE or
form that males and females aren't different, and it
doesn't mean in any way, shape, and form that
there's not two typical categories. It just means that
the variation, the biological variation is distributed there. So
that's, that would be my response to that. Like,
if you have to work so hard to explain
away a chunk of humanity, uh, or a chunk
of organisms in a species, I, I think that's
not good biology. On the other hand, medically speaking,
we have to be very, very careful because there
are typical patterns in gender sexed individuals, right? So,
for example, um, women, Uh, in, in, in contemporary
data sets, women die after heart attacks much more
than men. OK. We know there's no sex differences
in hearts, that the hearts actually are not sex-specific.
Um, SO something is going on, and we really
need them to study what's going on, what are
differences in life, life histories, contacts between women and
men. And so then, we want these typical categories
because we want to look at what's going on.
Another, uh, example here is that intersex individuals are,
are prone to much, much higher, uh, risks of
a variety of Different kinds of, um, social, uh,
violence and, and other things like that. And so,
rather than saying, oh well, that's because of the
er we have to think about, well, what is
the characteristic, the social, the historical, the frame of
intersection individuals that, that results in these kind of
outcomes. So, here I'm arguing for, sometimes we really
need to use these categories, but biologically, we have
to not reify them as the way humans are,
rather, think about the biological variation.
Mhm. So, we're going to come back to the
distribution of sex biology in humans. I have a
few more questions about that. But now let me
ask you also about another thing that you talk
about in the book, namely, uh, in the comparison
that we, or the comparisons that we can make
between ourselves and uh and other. Primates, particularly our
closest primate relatives. So, in terms of primates, how
much variability is there in terms of behavioral differences
between males and females? And do we know how
much of it is the result or has been
the result of sexual selection?
Well, what I think primates are great and and
humans are primates, so, right? Primates are the the
logical first sort of step of comparison, right? And
then we might want to constrain it to apes
in some context, but let's say the primate-wide. Um,
AND primates are fascinating as mammals too, because one,
there is a some clear typical patterns of classic
sexual selection in, in, in primates, right? Or, or
at least we think that's what explains. There's a
whole cluster of primates. It's about a quarter. SPECIES,
maybe a little bit more, um, where we see
body size differences, large males, smaller females, uh, males
with much more substantial canine teeth, and some other
musculature and physical morphology that that indicates a kind
of increased capacity for conflict or aggressive violence or
things like that. And so, in some species, we're
like, wow, you know, we really see these morphological
phenotypic outcomes of the kinds of sexual selection we'd
expect. However, in other species, we don't, right? Uh,
THEN we see these sort of uh monomorphics or
same size primates where you get all of these
weird things, weird. I mean, it's part of the
variation with extensive male care or monomorphism without male
care, which doesn't make sense from the basic. Standard
sexual selection argument. Then we see some extreme dimorphism,
like in gorillas, which are amongst the most dimorphic
of all primates. Um, AND, and we see really
interesting relationships between adult males, particularly silverbacks and and
and young gorillas of affiliation. So not, not so
much. CARETAKING in the sense of carrying and and
holding, but a lot of play, a lot of
protection, and we're wondering about what are these behavioral
modification like, what is that relationship between uh uh
male gorillas and and young, and there's something really
important there. So, primates are a great comparative sense
because We have pretty much the entire range of
variation in uh uh uh uh an order of
mammals that should be fairly consistent across it. I
mean, and the example, even even in our close
relatives, right, we get bonobos and chimpanzees, so paninniscus
and pan troglodites. Who are actually more similar than
most people, uh, argue, so that that's another conversation.
But there are some classic differences, right? Uh PANTROLODIDES
in on average tends to be, uh, much more
sort of male bonded with really strong aggression between
communities, lethal aggression even, um, whereas Paninniscus seems to
be sort of female bonded with incredibly high rates
of socio. Sexual behavior and more affiliative reactions, interactions
between communities or across individuals. THEY do fight though.
I think that's important. People think bonobos don't fight,
they do. Um, BUT what's really interesting is that
here with the, the genus Pan, we're seeing pretty
much the same reproductive biology, physiology, even bodies. They're
not that different, and yet radically different sort of.
Sexual social systems. And, and I think that hints
at, as I say in the book, that we
really need to be careful about assuming, like, one
way to be, uh, in regards to sex for
organisms, because we have many organisms in the primates
and in other mammals and other species with morphologies
that should be presenting the same way for sexual
systems that do things totally differently.
So that last point, what does the fact that
chimpanzees and bonobos have the same sex biology but
differ in particular aspects of their behavior, tell us
about the link between sex, biology and the behavior
of each sex?
Well, it, it illustrates, I think, very robustly that
we have to be very, very careful about making
predictions about any given species or lineages, social, ecological,
behavioral dynamics based on their particular reproductive physiology. Um,
I think we, we can't make these 1 to
1 arguments and, and the chimpanzees and bonobos are
really good example that we've got radically, well, they're
really not that different, but, but, you know, pretty
different, um, uh, social and ecological realities without an
enormous difference physiologically or morphologically. Um, AND this, I
would argue, is characteristic of a lot of the
hyper-social mammals, not just primates. I think we could
look at cetaceans, look at some canids, and some
other very social mammals, and we see really interesting,
uh, meerkats or another one, really interesting sort of
complex patterns of social and sexual behavior, right? That
emerge from this mammalian reproductive physiology that we assume
tells us there's one way to be a mammal,
and it turns out there's not. There's many. And
they're all successful, right? That's, that's the interesting thing.
It's not just one better way to be a
mammal.
Sure. Uh, AND with that in mind, I mean,
what can we learn about human behavior by doing
comparative biology and studying our closest, uh, great ape
relatives and particularly chimpanzees and bonobos because many times
people use them as animal models and to make
inferences about uh human, male and human female behavior.
Well, I would say on one hand, um, the
comparative approach to this is why I got into
anthropology, because I was also well trained in zoology.
And I was really, I think, to really study
humans well, you also have to study other primates
and that, you know, I studied what, seagulls, dusky-footed
wood rats, mantis shrimp. I, I think comparative approaches
are, are that this is the treasure of the
Western scientific method, right? This idea that we think,
OK, here are a bunch of different patterns. Let's
study. DIFFERENT organisms to understand what's distinctive about different
lineages or different organisms. So, I think the comparative
approach is, for me, it's gold, right? That's the
way I think we really understand what's, what's distinctive
about any given lineage, what's distinctive about humans. The
flip side is, we have to be careful with
the comparative approach. So for years, people said chimpanzees
and bananas, right? Genus Pan is the model for
human evolution and human ancestors. And, and I would
suggest, as do many people now, it's actually a
pretty bad model. Um, CLEARLY, right, in the last
10 million years, Sort of the, the hominins and
genus Pan have really been on very different evolutionary
trajectories, and we've got some radically different, uh, social
organization and behavior, some superficial similarities, but there's a
lot of difference. And so I would argue that
we need to look across all of the great
apes, right? And, and, and, and the gibbons, all
the hominoids, if we want to do this sort
of outgroup for humans. I'm, I, I think chimpanzees
are really quite distinctive. Um, AND chimpanzees and bonobos,
and they overlap to a certain amount with us,
but they're not actually very good models, especially, for
example, let's take pantroglodides, right, chimpanzees. Male and female
dynamics in pantroglodides is nothing like male and female
dynamics in humans. Um, AND so using that as
our ancestor to sort of derive human, sort of
a model for ancestral things. I think that's a
bad idea. I think humans and chimpanzees are equally
derived from one another.
When it comes to understanding sexual behavior, and now
I'm going to focus on humans, but I bet
that it would also apply to other species. What
does the fact that uh it's not always the
case that we have sex for the sake of
reproduction, not all sex is reproductive, tell us about
sexual behavior and sex biology. I mean, why does
that matter?
Well, I think that's really, really important, uh, because
in, and we'll just talk about humans here, but
you're right, this goes for other animals as well.
Um, SOCIAL sex, that is the use of, let's
say, um, the sexual arousal system, right, which is
connected to, but not the only component of the
reproductive system. So sexual arousal, genitals, other kind of
physical. Physiological arousal and social interactions, these kinds of
behaviors are actually central for human social relationships. They,
there's a lot of energy invested. There's a lot
of risk in some cases in engaging these kinds
of things. Humans have, have very, very high rates
of, uh, sexually transmitted infections, which I think is
a very interesting thing. And so, because social sex
makes up such a large percentage of the actual
sexual activity in humans, I would argue, and, and
many others have, that we need to include that
in understanding the evolution of of of human sexual
biology. Um, CLEARLY, social sex has been central. It's
common across the hominoids and in many other primates.
It's been an important part of the sort of
adaptive dynamics of, of, of humans for a long
time. And So when we talk about sort of
what does it mean to have a particular reproductive
anatomy, um, we better include social sex in our
models for the costs and benefits of those dynamics.
And, and I think most people don't. Most people
think of the social sex is like an add-on
or a benefit, a side project, but I would
argue that it's a very, very Central behavior across
human history that it has particular energetic costs and
particular risks associated, particularly with uh uh sexually transmitted
infections, plus in social context, we also do it
with jealousy and a variety of other things. So
I think we need to include that in our
evolutionary models for understanding sex biology.
Yes, that's really interesting because it does seem to
me that many biologists and people who study, uh,
sex, human sex and human sexual behavior, whenever they're
talking about or studying the The weighing that people
make in terms of weighing the pluses and minuses
or the costs and benefits of having sex with
a particular person, they're always thinking about it leading
to reproduction or being reproductive in some way, right?
Yeah, and, and it turns out that for humans,
we know that's not true, right? That the majority
of human sexual interaction is not, does not produce
a reproductive outcome, even when those individuals are attending
to to sort of try to reproduce. Um, AND
we also know this is true for a number
of them, he brought up bonobos, but there's a
number of primate species where social sex is actually
critical, um, and we can even think about, you
know, let's think about chimpanzee males with no. Chance
of reproduction, right? But they engage in, in genital
contact and genital touching in, in many social instances.
And it's actually very central. Uh GORILLAS are, are
the same way. And so, we really need to,
I would argue, like you just said, maybe we
need to step back and say, OK, are our
models of sexual biology and sexual activity, including these
really important aspects, probably the most prominent aspects of
sexual behavior in the organisms that we're looking at?
Mhm. So let's get to go back to gender
then for a bit. What, what would you say
are the main differences really between sex and gender,
and I mean, is gender something that applies also
to species to other uh animal species apart from
humans?
So, I mean, this is again a whole show,
right? To, to have a bunch of folks and
and fight over this. Um, I currently right now,
and, and I could be wrong, but I use
gender only in humans right now, um, because of
the way that we're defining gender as this sort
of socially, behavioral, linguistically, uh, historically, politically, economically mediated
sets of expectations and roles for, for, for in
societies. Um. It's not to say it can't happen
in others, but I think it's a complicated definitional
process. I think there are sex roles in other
organisms, um, but gender is not just sex roles.
So gender is not 100% tied to sex biology,
right? Gender, so what, how masculine or feminine uh
one is actually is not 100 or not even
80% correlated with what chromosomes. What, uh, gonads and
what genitals they have. And so I think that's
very interesting. It's like sexual attraction also is broadly
correlated, but not 100% correlated. And so, gender, I
think, is really important because it's a complex social
dynamic. And we have to be very, very careful
not to conflate gender identities, gender roles, and gender
contexts with a causal relationship from Particular kinds of
um uh biological facets. So for example, a number
of scholars have said, well, testosterone, right? Testosterone causes
these huge differences in in bodies right between males
and females, and that's why men, the gender, behave
one way and women, the gender behave another way.
And, and I think there's a significant challenge to
that simplistic association. Clearly, testosterone is very important in,
in, you know, uh, many, many. Many species, uh,
and in humans, it has, it's very, uh, androgens
in general and all the hormones, but androgens have
a very, uh, important set of effects. But to
say that testosterone does men and not women is
sort of biologically inaccurate. Uh, AND so I think
we have to be careful of that slippage between
these really interesting gender dynamics, complicated gender dynamics, and
simplistic, causal biological explanations.
Uh, BUT when it comes to gender identity specifically,
what do you make of the fact that the
vast majority of humans apparently identify with their biological
sex?
Well, I'd say it's actually the reverse, right? It
is, that is gender. Uh, CLASSIFICATIONS, gender systems are
correlated with, centered around, uh, genitals or other aspects
of bodily appearance, right? So there is a connection
between that. And so it's not that most people
are like, oh, I identify with. It's just that
I live, this is my body, this is the
social, uh, reality I'm in. I sort of match
to the way in which the society. I grew
up in expects things to be. Um, BUT there's
a large percentage of people. It's not small. A
large percentage of people that are like, Well, I
sort of match, but sort of don't match. Um,
AND so I think there's a lot of variation.
I think right now, there's this huge fights about
gender identity because it's come to the fore. It's
been politicized in many ways. And it's also, uh,
I think, a complicated but very important, uh, argument.
But, but Does, does that make sense that I
think it's, it's the other way around. It's not
like people are like, Oh, well, I have my
gender identity because I have these genitals or genes.
It's more that I have this body and I
grew up into this society. I'm, I'm OK with
that. I, I, things feel right. In other ways.
Other people, I have this body, I grew up
into the society. I, I don't feel it. Something
is not right. So I, I would, I would
reverse that, that pattern.
Uh, I, I mean, could it be at least
in part, uh, because of sexually dimorphic areas of
the brain that would lead people to identify primarily
as men or as a man or a woman
or a female or a male?
No, the brain research is very, very clear on
this, that there's really not male and female brains,
right? There's sort of mosaics of masculine and feminine
performance in brains, but I mean, I think you
can look at like Lisa Elliott's work and and
even the, the major arguments for different sex differences
in the brain, like the big, uh, uh, uh,
article that came out recently, a couple of years
back, uh, from the, the, the British, the, the
big, uh, what's it called, the giant me the
population survey and. The UK. Anyway, the UK biodata,
uh, biobank, the UK biobank uh study, uh, which
is one of the largest ones, and they said,
look, there's clear differences. The differences are teeny, and
they're structural, and they're not able to tie them
to any functional differences. So, I mean, the bottom
line is there's not male and female brains, there's
a lot of variation. But, and this is, I
think, really important and goes to what we were
just talking about. When you look at brain activity
in adults, Gender shows up very strongly, like, your
masculine or feminine sense, your senses of man or
woman, your senses sort of in uh uh someone
who is not male, man or woman. That shows,
we can see that in the brain, but you
can't see that in kids. Um, AND so what's
really interesting is that clearly the way neurobiology works
is, as we grow up in a society in
this gender sexed reality, it shapes our body and
and our mind.
Yeah, I asked you that. I mean, this might
be outdated information. I'm not sure, but I read
some studies where apparently they found out that The
brains of transgender people are more similar to the
brains of people of the sex they identify with
that is, uh, the, the, the, the sex that
is opposite to the sex that was assigned to
them at birth. I mean, I'm not sure. Yeah,
no, so this is, so there's been some, there
were some initial work um. Uh, OVER the last
couple of decades, saying, oh, well, there might be
these morphological variants. That's, that doesn't pattern out. What
does pattern out, though, is that individuals who identify
sort of with particular feminine or particular masculine patterns
or contexts, they do have some overlap in brain
function. That is on MRI and other things, which
we can debate how good those are. But what
it looks like brains are reacting, in particular In
shared contexts, for example, individuals who identify as highly
feminine seem to be reacting in the same ways
to their brain, right? But morphologically, no, there's no,
you can't, I mean, I put, I can put
40 brains up here, and, and you couldn't tell
morphologically what the differences are. Um, AND there's a
big debate about that, but I would read Lise
Elliott and colleagues, uh, giant, uh, overview called Dump
the Dimorphism, which is a really, really good. Sort
of argument for, yes, there's some patterns, but really
to say male and female brain is to reject
biological fact at this point.
Mhm. And, and so since we're talking about gender,
where do gender roles come from? I mean, how
do they evolve?
So, as you know in the book, I, I
try my hand a little bit at this, but
let me just be very, very honest with you.
Uh, PALEOANTHROPOLOGICAL and pale archaeological data give us very
little insight into gender. They give us a little,
a little bit of hints, right? Um, CLEARLY, um,
some data from Neanderthal. I mean, when we go
deeper than, let's say, 20 or 30,000 years, right?
When we look at the, the fossil and archaeological
record that's older than 20 or 30,000 years, we're
not seeing much evidence for gender roles. We don't
see sort of patterns of associated with sex, with
tool construction or or or a variety or bone
breakage or anything like that. But we do see
some patterns in Neanderthals, for example, slightly different dental
wear between those we think are male and those
that we think are female. That's Interesting, right? That
suggests some sort of patterns of behavioral difference. Anyway,
I, I reviewed in the book, um, and so
what I'm arguing is that clearly I think Social
roles associated with morphology, bodily morphology, probably have a
very deep history, um, and humans have probably categorized
sort of social experience and context in different ways,
using bodies as a mediator, uh, or indicator of
some patterns. I think that's really old. We, we
can't really demonstrate that. Clearly, up until recently, in
the last 4 or 56 1000 years, we can
start to see what we Consider typical contemporary gender
roles, right? Where we start to see, let's, for
example, grave goods are very different between those bodies
we think are male and female, although we, we
keep misidentifying bodies by sex. Um, AND, and I
think so we can see the emergence of, of
contemporary gender roles in the last, you know, 4567
millennia. Um, DOES that mean gender did not exist
in the past? No. I think it did, and
I think it evolved alongside Of social complexity in
the genus Homo. Um, DO I think Australopithecines had
gender in the way we think of gender? I,
I don't know. I don't see any evidence for
that. But I think over the last million years
at least, we probably see the emergence of something
we would call gender. But I would suggest, given
cross-cultural evidence from today, and what little archaeological evidence
we have is that gender roles in the past
may have been quite different from gender roles today.
So, in, in the book, you also talk about
uh sex differences and and sex biology and modern
contemporary humans. I mean, why do you think it
is important to talk about modern contemporary humans and
not just humans, homo sapiens in general?
Well, because I think contemporary humans are very, very
important in the sense that we know sort of
this general body plan, it's been around a long
time, but the contemporary dynamic changes a lot. We
know that height has changed over recent time, sort
of weight distribution patterns, adipose tissue patterns, and so.
It's also, it's so it's important to sort of
get an idea of, of, of, you know, what
is, what are the 8 billion humans around? What's
that variation look like? CAUSE I'm really interested in
biological variation. So how's that pattern? I also put
that section in there and it was, it was
a really fun and difficult section to write, how
to, what to put in and what not to
put in. But the point is, is, I, I
want people, I want readers of this book to
recognize I'm not saying males and females are the
same. I'm not saying all humans are the same.
There's some patterned variation, typical and atypical patterns. What
do we know about it? How is it out
there? And so I wanted to sort of show
that there's some very well established, very important patterns
of variation that differ, and other patterns that people
think differ that don't differ in the way they
think. So, I, uh, that whole chapter, the point
is like, OK, what are we really talking about
when we talk about sex differences? I would push
against the use of that term, and I would
say patterns of variation between categories and within categories.
In some cases, they meet the level of what
I would call difference. In other categories, they don't,
right? And, and, and, you know, in the book,
I go over things like hair, right? And adipose
deposition and organs, and, you know, ski. There's all
of these different things that we're like, sure, this
is the way males and females are, but when
you actually look at the data, it's much more
complicated. Um, This is not to say there aren't
pattern differences in things like, you know, certain aspects
of reproductive physiology, certain frequencies and patterns of endocrine
response and dynamics, certain patterns of musculature and, uh,
sort of muscle mass and activity. Those are really
important patterns of variation that we need to talk
about, but they're not binary. There's almost nothing in,
in our bodies that is binary. A little bit,
but we are dimorphic, right? Uh, BUT, but binary,
almost nothing.
How about behavior? Uh, ARE there any average sex
differences that you, you, that you would consider here?
So, I have that whole chapter in there, there's
no battle of the sexes, cause I, one of
the arguments that stems from anisogamy and this whole
idea of of of certain universal patterns of sexual
selection is, is that males and females should want
different things, they should be different in the world.
And so we can look at Physiological, biological, and
sort of, um, behavioral literatures, overviews, meta-analysis, different kinds
of context. How different are are these categories of
men and women usually, because it's usually not they're
not testing whether they're 3G male or female, so
we're we're using self-identification usually. Um, AND, and what
we see is there's some interesting differences, but these
differences are not clearly related to particular biological patterns.
So here we get gender and history and context.
So, um, I, I, I'm, it's very hard to
say for humans that there are clear biological sex,
causal variants related to particular. And behavior. Clearly there's
some, and I talk about a few in the
book, but, but I, I think we need to
be very, very cautious and think very carefully about
what data we have access to, right? So, for
example, uh, the socio sexual, uh, inventory, right? So,
so men, uh, rank higher on sort of interest
in sexuality than women cross culturally in all these
different kinds of contexts. What does that actually mean?
What might that mean and how are those data
collected, and what impact does gender, society, history, you
have on the way people report, self-report information? And
so I talked a little bit about the sort
of relation between anatomy, right, and say the, you
know, frequency of masturbation, anatomy, culture. History, and the
interview and survey practices might influence those data. So,
I, I think there's much more work to be
done there. I'm not saying that there's not going
to be some particular behavioral patterns that are strongly
and even causally related to sex biology. I just
think most people go there right away without actually
sufficient data to support those assertions.
So earlier I, I've asked you about definitions that
are based on the size of gametes. In the
particular case of humans, many times people refer to
sex chromosomes and say that if you are X
sex, you're a female and you are a woman,
and if you are XY, you're a male and
you are a man. I mean, what is really
the relationship between sex chromosomes and the sort of
primary and secondary sex characteristics that humans tend to
develop?
That that's great. That's like 7 questions in a
very well phrased one. So, um, but no, no,
so I think let's take the first one, right?
Do, do sort of whether you are XX or
XY. And again, here, let's, let's even just ignore
all the other variants there because there are other
biological variants within the distribution. Let's just say XX
and XY. Um, DOES that have a 100% correlation
with particular specific sort of secondary sexual characteristics, uh,
aspects of body hair, presentation, uh, body morphology, um,
sexual activity, sexual attractiveness, uh, genital morphology, things like
that. In a loose sense, yes. In a tight
sense, no. That is, we get these general patterns,
but when you go down and break down large
data sets to look at let's let's take someone
who is XY. OK, let's actually say, you're XY,
let's look at your genitals, right? Um, AND, and
what is, what we see is enormous variation, not
In the general sense, do you have a penis
and scrotum? But what, what constitutes that penis and
scrotum and what's the dynamics going on there, and
what's going on? Another thing is, is testosterone, which
is obviously associated, you know, androgen levels differ in
X Y and XX on average. There's actually a
lot of variation there. But let's say XY. Within
the XY category, right, testosterone levels vary by as
much as 300% between individuals. Right? So, so the
problem is that there's a general pattern, but then
when we ask the biologically or even medically relevant
questions, it becomes much, much less clear. And there's
much more variation than we think. So, do you
see how I'm saying this, these two levels? And,
and, and then the second part of the question,
you know, is male the same as man and
this woman? And the same as female. Um, I'm
gonna say no. And we just had a decision
in the United Kingdom, uh, yesterday that basically defines
women via a particular biological set of characteristics. I
haven't read the full decision, but I think they
go to chromosomal, um, uh, complement. Um, AND I
would argue that's very problematic. You may define female
that way, which I still think is problematic, but
woman is a gender category. Man is a gender
category. There are correlations between women and female, and
man and male, but they are not identical for
all the reasons that we've already been talking about.
And I think one wants to be very, very
careful, particularly when we get to cultural, political, economic
dynamics, or otherwise known as the legal system. When
you make laws, right, like here in the United
States, where they, the, it's not a law, but
the, uh, the White House, the, the current administration
said. You know, that uh men and women, male
and female, are the same thing, and that they're
defined by gametes produced at conception. Like there's so
many things wrong with that, but I mean, you,
you can't produce any gametes at conception, right? You,
you just are the fusion of two gametes. Nothing
is going on yet. Um, BUT, but the The
bottom line is that in a society, gender dynamics
are quite complex, rarely binary, in truth, um, and
should not be artificially linked to one complex biological
characteristic that does not necessarily predict, uh, gendered outcomes.
Does that, is that close enough?
Yes, and I mean, I was also going to
ask you because there are many people that use
definitions of men and women, such as men being
an adult human, male and uh woman and adult
human female. I mean, do you think that those
kinds of definitions are useful in any way from
a scientific perspective, of course.
So those are social definitions and political definitions. I
would argue from scientific perspective, if a man is
an adult male human, why don't you say adult
male human? That, so there, there's a slippage there,
right? Why, why are you using man, which is
a clear gendered thing which has complex histories of
definition and experience, experience is associated with theoretical and
conceptual social realities of masculine. SALINITY and particular histories
of behavior. Like, if you're really talking about biology,
say adult male human, say juvenile male human. OK.
Those are, like, to, to, to sort of flip
that like boy, right? Boy and girl, right? Which
are very important gendered categories. Um, THEY are not
biological definitions. Um, AND so I would argue when
someone says, no, a man is an adult male
human, um, all they're doing. Is taking a very
complex social, cultural, historical, political term, man, that's experienced
differently in many ways by different individuals, and artificially
forcing it upon a biological frame, right? So, I,
I think, uh, that's what, that would be my
argument against that. I know a lot of people
disagree with me, but really, if you're a biologist
and you're interested in biology, why would you use
a complex, messy gendered term when you can just
say adult male human?
Mhm. So what does it mean to say that
sex is a spectrum, and I mean, we can
talk about sex being a spectrum across species, but
also sex being a spectrum within particular species, but
I mean, what does it mean to say that
it is a spectrum? I mean, couldn't it be
in terms of distribution simply a by modal distribution
or uh would you classify a bimodal distribution also
as a spectrum?
So, uh, that, that's really the, the bottom line
question of my whole book. Why, why title it
affects the spectrum, the biological limits of the binary.
So let me start with the second part. Um,
AS you see with, with our whole discussion here,
I've argued, and, and I think this is fairly
well supported, that using binary as a sort of
complete categorization of sex across the animal kingdom. AND
in humans is insufficient because it limits our ability
to understand biological variation. All right, let's put that
aside. So, OK, what do we use then? When
I say sex is a spectrum, most people think
it's like, oh, anything goes. I'm like, no, no,
no, no. A spectrum, let's take a light spectrum
or a sound spectrum. It is a measurable, distinct
distribution of variation, right? With different clusters of frequencies
or patterns. There are typical clusters and patterns that
we can identify. We can circle, and we can
look at them, and we can identify them as
distinct from, right? In some ways, other clusters of
patterns, but not consisting of different kinds, right? So,
blue and red are not actually different kinds. They're
different wavelengths of light. So they're the same, the
photons, the sort of patterns and what have you.
And so, what I really want to get at,
well, I think sex is a spectrum is really
good, is that look at my body. Uh, I,
I'm, I'm a 3G male, right? Uh. Uh, EVEN
though here's a great example, so 3G males tend
to have very like 90 degree jaw angles. I
have a much larger than 90 degree jaw angle
just to show that, look, there's a lot of
variation. Anyway, um, I'm a 3G male. Compare me
with a 3G female. And there's a lot of
patterns of variation that differ. Clusters of variation that
differ, including some very important ones, right? Related to
reprogressive physiology and other things. Um, HOWEVER, none of
our sort of tissue masses, none of the basic
structures within our cells, none of the bones, none
of the muscles, none of those things are different
in kind. And so, if we see human variation
as the spectrum of difference of variation of patterns
that clusters in typical ways, we then can understand
those clusters, but we also understand that there's other
variation. Right? That doesn't fit into those clusters. It's
just as human. And also, we understand that those
clusters of variations aren't different kinds of things, but
rather different patterns. And those different patterns emerge from
things like different kinds of pressures on reproductive dynamics
or different kinds of evolutionary structures and things like
that. It's just that it's not in a binary
format. And I think the binary inhibits us from
asking good questions about evolution, about behavior, and about
medicine.
Mhm. So, OK, so you've already at least partially
answered my next question, but why do you think
that a binary approach to sex is problematic and
I, I mean, in this particular case, I'm also
referring to aspects of perhaps human life and society
that uh uh in which it manifests that you
think are perhaps problematic.
Yeah, so I, I give a bunch of examples
in the book because I think this is, this,
if, if our scientific knowledge, if our study of
human biology doesn't have some translation into the world
into the society we live in, then I, I
think we're not doing it right, right? So we,
we should be able to convince people that what
we're doing is, is relevant in some ways. So
let me just give you a couple quick examples.
I mean, one is the construction of family. Here
in the United States, there are hundreds of laws.
That are aimed at limiting family formation in legal
sense, right? Family formation to uh uh a 3G
male, a 3G female, who are both um uh
heterosexual and they're reproductive or adopted, you know, the,
the sort of young, um, and that's fine as
a unit, right? But as a legal structure, first
of all, it ignores. HUMAN biology, which is much
more complicated, and we know that families consist of
multiple, multiple individuals related and unrelated, and that part
of the whole human adaptive zone, right, is this
sort of large cooperative group engagement. And so, because
people making these laws assume that males and females
are two different kinds, and that getting them together
is the way you start a family. That's the
only bi. Logical reality. Um, THEY actually think it's
also a religious or, uh, a kind of spiritual
reality. Um, THAT restriction then constrains actual human success
because we know that humans need multiple individuals, multiple
connections of kin and friends and community to survive.
Um, AND so here's where the sort of idea
of a binary translates itself into, I think, a
harmful legal structure. Another example is, is in medicine,
right? There's so much harm done to women in
in contemporary medical practice right now, because for so
many decades, centuries, women have been seen as sort
of either too erratic or complicated to study, or
just sort of one step down from men, right?
Remember, up until around the 1800s, women were seen
as there wasn't a two sex model. There was
a one sex model where there's men. And then
those women are sort of this degraded version of
men. Um, SO, in the medical context, we need
to really understand the category, right? That cluster of
variation that we call female and women, right? So,
in, in the, in the gender sex context, um,
much, much better. But if we keep this as
a binary, Approach within like men and women are
two different kinds. And that unfortunately cuts us off
from understanding the overlapping biological variation between these clusters
to understand what patterns do we ask questions about,
about variation, about biology, what patterns do we ask
about sort of society and history and culture. So,
for example, I, I, I mentioned earlier, many more
women die after in the year after a heart
attack than do men. It's not based on their,
the biological structure of their heart because there there
isn't a sex difference in in hearts aside from
on average a little bit of size. What's going
on? How do we study that? To study that,
you can't say that, oh well, that's a woman's
heart thing. So we're gonna look at women's hearts.
No, you need to understand what are the social,
cultural, and biological dynamics that are leading into that.
And so I think a binary approach, which divides
men and women as kinds, misses probably a lot
of the underlying biological variation that might help us,
you know, save lives.
Mhm. So, let me just run through you some
other criticisms that I found among people who come
from the other side and say that sex, at
least in humans, is binary. Uh, THE first one
I, I've already sort of, uh, Alluded to it
earlier, but, uh, they say that there's only 2
types of games and only two different ways of
reproducing and not a third kind of gamut or
a third way of reproducing or even more than
that. Uh, WHAT do you respond to that?
Well, there isn't only two types of reproducing, right?
There's actually reproductive range. It's complicated, but let's, let's
let that aside because reproductive dynamics are, are complicated.
Um, YES, there are only two gametes and in
all anisogamic systems there are 2 gametes, but does
an egg equal a female or a woman? Does
understanding that this is a large gamete tell you?
Specific important things universally about all human females or
all human women. No, no, it doesn't actually. And
so, you can say that there's, you know, uh
a sperm and an egg, and that's the definition
of male and female. But how does that translate,
for example, to laws? How does that translate to
understanding health? How does that translate to understanding, uh,
other dynamics? Because an in the variation within individuals
that produce Eggs or sperm is enormous. Uh, AND
if you uniform, you say, this is just this
one category, you're gonna undermine the potential of understanding
of what pattern, what patterns of variation are are
across these, what patterns of variation related to health,
for example, are not related to, uh, gametete production,
because a ton of our body is not directed
by the particulars that we Productive physiology. So for
example, you can have, uh, be a large gay
producer, but you can also have many, many characteristics
in the body that are more in line with
small gay producers, right? And that's not totally atypical.
So then what do you do with that? So
that, that, that'd be my argument. Like, sure, fine,
you wanna call large gamut producer, female, small gam
producer, male, that's great. What does that actually tell
you?
Right. Uh, SO another argument is that, uh, only
females have babies, uh, and not males. What do
you make of that?
That is true. I mean, what, what kind of
argument is that? Do all females have babies? No.
Um. Do only female mammals, right? Only mammals with
a uterus, a functioning uterus, and particular other aspects
of reproductive biology can gestate effectively, and if they
have uh mammary tissue and the the right glandular
development, they can lactate. True. I mean, I, that's
true, right? What, what, what, what, what is that?
So that, that means that's a category that we
have to treat completely differently. So what about female
hearts? Right, that we know that hearts aren't female.
So just because there's some patterns of clusters of
variation that are quite distinctive in these clusters, all
the other patterns aren't. And so just to say
that, to say that only women can have infants,
that's absolutely true. So what does that mean and
how does that relate? What does that tell us
about care? What does it tell us about physiology?
And a very important outcome of that that people
ignore is that there's substantial differences in vascular systems,
some neurobiology, and some endocrine patterns between those individuals
with uteri who have Reproduced and those who haven't.
And that's actually really interesting and understudied area because
there's like, well, women have infants, boom, we're done.
To define a woman or a female solely based
on their ability, potential ability to reproduce is highly
problematic, right? And undermines a lot of the patterns
of variation and understanding of the organism.
And so finally, what would be a definition of
non-binary sex?
So, sex, as I've said, we can define it
in a whole bunch of different ways, right? The
way I'm using with humans, I'm really interested in
using 3G sex categories. That is, uh, typical clusters
of variation around genetics, gonads, and genitals, because these
are measurable, these are biological characteristics. They're patterns that
relate to physiological and even behavioral function. And so
we can identify those and look at them. However,
none of those genes is non-variable, and none of
those genes are binary. Um, THEY are actually patterns
of variation that cluster in particular ways with overlap
in some cases and not overlap in others. And
so that's not a binary sex definition. It has
two categories, but two categories does not equal binary,
right? Uh, AND I think that's what people understand.
It means 10. That means two different kinds of
thing within a category. And males and females for
me are not different kinds of things. The variations
on a theme. We're all human. To say that
we're two different kinds of human is really, I
think, a philosophical assertion, not a biological one.
OK. Great. So, the book is again, sex is
a Spectrum, the biological limits of the binary. Of
course, I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview and also a link, uh,
and also links to our first two interviews. So,
Doctor Fuentes, just before we go, would you like
to just tell people apart from your book, where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Yeah, I mean, I just, uh, let me just
say about the book. I mean, my goal here
is a better conversation. We need to talk about
this more, and we need to talk about this
with more information. I think this sex, gender, this
stuff is really important. It matters for people's lives,
and, and, and I want to see better conversations,
not a bunch of yelling and screaming. So being
something rooted in actual biological and evolutionary framing, thinking
about humans as biocultural organisms, I think it's beneficial.
I think it'll Lead to a better conversation. Or
at least I optimistically hope it will. You can,
uh, follow me, uh, at BlueSky Anto Fuentes at
Bluesky, also on, I'm still on X. I don't
know why, but I'm still there. So Anto Fuentes.
Um, I, I'm on Instagram, but very rarely. Um,
uh, I will update my website afuentes.com soon and
so I'll have some, uh, videos and other kinds
of things there. And as always, uh, you, you
know, you can email me if you have questions.
Great. I'm also leaving links to all of that
in the description then and as always, it's been
a big pleasure to talk to you. Thank you
very much for the fun and uh entertaining conversation.
So Ricardo, thank you so much for all that
you do, these interviews, the conversations, it's a great
contribution to your knowledge, so I'm always glad to,
to come and chat with you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Joe, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bortolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis
Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivas, and Rosie. Thank you for all.